I LOVE Gargoyles

A HISTORY OF THE GARGOYLE
Gargoyles have been used throughout the ages. In Ancient Egyptian architecture, gargoyles were prominently sculpted in the form of a lion’s head. Similar lion-mouthed waterspouts were also recorded on the Greek temples. Currently, there are 39 remaining lion-headed water drains on the Temple of Zeus. Originally, there were 102 gargoyles populating the Temple’s gutters, but they have since fallen off or been replaced.

The Catholic Church’s primary use of the gargoyle was to illustrate evil. The church wanted to convey a realistic image of the possibility of a damned afterlife. The Gothic idea was one of pain and suffering and the buildings loomed over the citizens in a romantically dramatic cloud. The gargoyles are represented by demons and monsters to insinuate safety and sanctity inside of the cathedral.
CHIMERA, GARGOYLE, OR GROTESQUE?
When exploring the steps and halls of the Notre Dame, you may be incorrect in labeling a few of those carved monsters as gargoyles. The Catholic Church provides you with an official pamphlet upon entering the cathedral that supplies you with the correct terminology.

Chimera
Chimera are ornamental-only sculptures. These statues are often depicted as monsters or mythical beasts. The two most famous types of chimera are the Wyvern, a two-footed dragon, and the Stryga, known as the “spitting gargoyle”.

Grotesques
This is the genetic term for stone carvings, regardless of whether they carry water.

Gargoyles
Gargoyles are chimera and grotesques. They are ornamental, stone carvings that serve a functional purpose. Before you go ahead calling a spade a spade, make sure that it drains water, first.
What is the purpose of the gargoyles on Notre Dame?
The gargoyles' main purpose is very practical. As rain water runs down the roofs of Notre-Dame de Paris, it needs to drain off without dripping down the walls and potentially damaging them. By evacuating rain water, the gargoyles protect the cathedral and protect the stone from damage caused by excessive runoff.